examples/embedded-devices/README.md, before:

---
tags: [basic, vision, embedded]
dataset: [Fashion-MNIST]
framework: [torch]
---

# Federated AI with Embedded Devices using Flower

This example will show you how Flower makes it very easy to run Federated Learning workloads on edge devices. Here we'll be showing how to use Raspberry Pi as Flower clients, or better said, `SuperNodes`. The FL workload (i.e. model, dataset and training loop) is mostly borrowed from the [quickstart-pytorch](https://github.com/adap/flower/tree/main/examples/quickstart-pytorch) example, but you could adjust it to follow [quickstart-tensorflow](https://github.com/adap/flower/tree/main/examples/quickstart-tensorflow) if you prefere using TensorFlow. The main difference compare to those examples is that here you'll learn how to use Flower's Deployment Engine to run FL across multiple embedded devices.

![Different was of running Flower FL on embedded devices](_static/diagram.png)

## Getting things ready

> [!NOTE]
> This example is designed for beginners that know a bit about Flower and/or ML but that are less familiar with embedded devices. If you already have a couple of devices up and running, clone this example and start the Flower clients after launching the Flower server.

This tutorial allows for a variety of settings (some shown in the diagrams above). As long as you have access to one embedded device, you can follow along. This is a list of components that you'll need:

- For Flower server: A machine running Linux/macOS (e.g. your laptop). You can run the server on an embedded device too!
- For Flower clients (one or more): Raspberry Pi 5 or 4 (or Zero 2), or anything similar to these.
- A uSD card with 32GB or more.
- Software to flash the images to a uSD card:
  - For Raspberry Pi we recommend the [Raspberry Pi Imager](https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/)
  - For other devices [balenaEtcher](https://www.balena.io/etcher/) it's a great option.

What follows is a step-by-step guide on how to setup your client/s and the server.

## Clone this example

> [!NOTE]
> Cloning the example and installing the project is only needed for the machine that's going to start the run. The embedded devices would typically run a Flower `SuperNode` for which only `flwr` and relevant libraries needed to run the `ClientApp` (more on this later) are needed.

Start with cloning this example on your laptop or desktop machine. We have prepared a single line which you can copy and execute:

```shell
git clone --depth=1 https://github.com/adap/flower.git \
          && mv flower/examples/embedded-devices . \
          && rm -rf flower && cd embedded-devices
```

This will create a new directory called `embedded-devices` with the following structure:

```shell
embedded-devices
├── embeddedexample
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── client_app.py   # Defines your ClientApp
│   ├── server_app.py   # Defines your ServerApp
│   └── task.py         # Defines your model, training and data loading
├── pyproject.toml      # Project metadata like dependencies and configs
└── README.md
```

Install the dependencies defined in `pyproject.toml` as well as the `embeddedexample` package.

```bash
pip install -e .
```

## Setting up a Raspberry Pi

> [!TIP]
> This steps walk you through the process of setting up a Rapsberry Pi. If you have one already running and you have a Python environment with `flwr` installed already, you can skip this section entirely. Taking a quick look at the [Embedded Devices Setup](device_setup.md) page might be useful.

![alt text](_static/rpi_imager.png)

1. **Installing Ubuntu server on your Raspberry Pi** is easy with the [Raspberry Pi Imager](https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/). Before starting ensure you have a uSD card attached to your PC/Laptop and that it has sufficient space (ideally larger than 16GB). Then:

   - Click on `CHOOSE OS` > `Raspberry Pi OS (other)` > `Raspberry Pi OS Lite (64-bit)`. Other versions of `Raspberry Pi OS` or even `Ubuntu Server` would likely work but try to use a `64-bit` one.
   - Select the uSD you want to flash the OS onto. (This will be the uSD you insert in your Raspberry Pi)
   - After selecting your storage, click on `Next`. Then, you'll be asked if you want to edit the settings of the image you are about to flash. This allows you to setup a custom username and password as well as indicate to which WiFi network your device should connect to. In the screenshot you can see some dummy values. This tutorial doesn't make any assumptions on these values, set them according to your needs.
   - Finally, complete the remaining steps to start flashing the chosen OS onto the uSD card.

2. **Preparations for your Flower experiments**

   - SSH into your Rapsberry Pi.
   - Follow the steps outlined in [Embedded Devices Setup](device_setup.md) to set it up for develpment. The objetive of this step is to have your Pi ready to join later as a Flower `SuperNode` to an existing federation.

3. Run your Flower experiments following the steps in the [Running FL with Flower](https://github.com/adap/flower/tree/main/examples/embedded-devices#running-fl-training-with-flower) section.

## Embedded Federated AI

> [!TIP]
> Follow this [how-to guide](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/how-to-run-flower-with-deployment-engine.html) to learn more about Flower's Deployment Engine, how setting up [secure TLS-enabled communications](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/how-to-enable-tls-connections.html) and [SuperNode authentication](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/how-to-authenticate-supernodes.html) works. If you are already familiar with how the Deployment Engine works, you may want to learn how to run this same example using Docker. Check out the [Flower with Docker](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/docker/index.html) documentation.

For this demo, we'll be using [Fashion-MNIST](https://huggingface.co/datasets/zalando-datasets/fashion_mnist), a popular dataset for image classification comprised of 10 classes (e.g. boot, dress, trouser) and a total of 70K `28x28` greyscale images. The training set contains 60K images.

> [!TIP]
> Refer to the [Flower Architecture](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/explanation-flower-architecture.html) page for an overview of the different components involved in a federation.

### Ensure your embedded devices have some data

Unless your devices already have some images that could be used to train a small CNN, we need to send a partition of the `Fashion-MNIST` dataset to each device that will run as a `SuperNode`. You can make use of the `generate_dataset.py` script to partition the `Fashion-MNIST` into N disjoint partitions that can be then given to each device in the federation.

```shell
# Partition the Fashion-MNIST dataset into two partitions
python generate_dataset.py --num-supernodes=2
```

The above command will create two subdirectories in `./datasets`, one for each partition. Next, copy those dataset over to your devices. You can use `scp` for this. Like shown below. Repeat for all your devices.

```shell
# Copy one partition to a device
scp -r datasets/fashionmnist_part_1 <user>@<device-ip>:/path/to/home
```

### Launching the Flower `SuperLink`

On your development machine, launch the `SuperLink`. You will connnect Flower `SuperNodes` to it in the next step.

```shell
flower-superlink --insecure
```

### Connecting Flower `SuperNodes`

With the `SuperLink` up and running, we can now launch a `SuperNode` on each embedded device. To do this, make sure you know the IP address of the machine running the `SuperLink` and that the necessary data has been copied to the device.

When using `--node-config`, note that we set a key named `dataset-path`. This key is required by the `ClientApp` defined in [client_app.py](embeddedexample/client_app.py). The configuration file will be automatically delivered to the `SuperNode`, ensuring it can execute the `ClientApp` logic correctly.

> [!NOTE]
> You don't need to clone this example to your embedded devices running as Flower `SuperNodes`. The code they will execute (in [embeddedexamples/client_app.py](embeddedexamples/client_app.py)) will automatically be delivered.

Ensure the Python environment you created earlier when setting up your device has all dependencies installed. For this example you'll need the following:

```shell
# After activating your environment
pip install -U flwr
pip install torch torchvision datasets
```

Now, launch your `SuperNode` pointing it to the dataset you `scp`-ed earlier:

```shell
# Repeat for each embedded device (adjust SuperLink IP and dataset-path)
flower-supernode --insecure --superlink="SUPERLINK_IP:9092" \
                 --node-config="dataset-path='path/to/fashionmnist_part_1'"
```

Repeat for each embedded device that you want to connect to the `SuperLink`.

### Run the Flower App

With both the long-running server (`SuperLink`) and two `SuperNodes` up and running, we can now start run. First, locate your Flower Configuration file:

```bash
flwr config list
# Flower Config file: /path/to/your/.flwr/config.toml
# SuperLink connections:
#  supergrid
#  local (default)
```

and add a new `SuperLink` connection at the end:

```TOML
[superlink.embedded-federation]
address = "127.0.0.1:9093" # ControlAPI of your SUPERLINK
insecure = true
```

Finally, run your Flower App in your federation.

```shell
flwr run . embedded-federation
```

> [!TIP]
> For more details about how to create a SuperLink connection please refer to the [How-To use Flower's Deployment Engine guide](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/how-to-run-flower-with-deployment-engine.html). Read more about the Flower Configuration file in [this guide](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/ref-flower-configuration.html).

Commit message:

refactor(examples): Tweak `update-examples-flwr-config` branch (#6532)

examples/embedded-devices/README.md, after:

---
tags: [basic, vision, embedded]
dataset: [Fashion-MNIST]
framework: [torch]
---

# Federated AI with Embedded Devices using Flower

This example will show you how Flower makes it very easy to run Federated Learning workloads on edge devices. Here we'll be showing how to use Raspberry Pi as Flower clients, or better said, `SuperNodes`. The FL workload (i.e. model, dataset and training loop) is mostly borrowed from the [quickstart-pytorch](https://github.com/adap/flower/tree/main/examples/quickstart-pytorch) example, but you could adjust it to follow [quickstart-tensorflow](https://github.com/adap/flower/tree/main/examples/quickstart-tensorflow) if you prefere using TensorFlow. The main difference compare to those examples is that here you'll learn how to use Flower's Deployment Engine to run FL across multiple embedded devices.

![Different was of running Flower FL on embedded devices](_static/diagram.png)

## Getting things ready

> [!NOTE]
> This example is designed for beginners that know a bit about Flower and/or ML but that are less familiar with embedded devices. If you already have a couple of devices up and running, clone this example and start the Flower clients after launching the Flower server.

This tutorial allows for a variety of settings (some shown in the diagrams above). As long as you have access to one embedded device, you can follow along. This is a list of components that you'll need:

- For Flower server: A machine running Linux/macOS (e.g. your laptop). You can run the server on an embedded device too!
- For Flower clients (one or more): Raspberry Pi 5 or 4 (or Zero 2), or anything similar to these.
- A uSD card with 32GB or more.
- Software to flash the images to a uSD card:
  - For Raspberry Pi we recommend the [Raspberry Pi Imager](https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/)
  - For other devices [balenaEtcher](https://www.balena.io/etcher/) it's a great option.

What follows is a step-by-step guide on how to setup your client/s and the server.

## Clone this example

> [!NOTE]
> Cloning the example and installing the project is only needed for the machine that's going to start the run. The embedded devices would typically run a Flower `SuperNode` for which only `flwr` and relevant libraries needed to run the `ClientApp` (more on this later) are needed.

Start with cloning this example on your laptop or desktop machine. We have prepared a single line which you can copy and execute:

```shell
git clone --depth=1 https://github.com/adap/flower.git \
          && mv flower/examples/embedded-devices . \
          && rm -rf flower && cd embedded-devices
```

This will create a new directory called `embedded-devices` with the following structure:

```shell
embedded-devices
├── embeddedexample
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── client_app.py   # Defines your ClientApp
│   ├── server_app.py   # Defines your ServerApp
│   └── task.py         # Defines your model, training and data loading
├── pyproject.toml      # Project metadata like dependencies and configs
└── README.md
```

Install the dependencies defined in `pyproject.toml` as well as the `embeddedexample` package.

```bash
pip install -e .
```

## Setting up a Raspberry Pi

> [!TIP]
> This steps walk you through the process of setting up a Rapsberry Pi. If you have one already running and you have a Python environment with `flwr` installed already, you can skip this section entirely. Taking a quick look at the [Embedded Devices Setup](device_setup.md) page might be useful.

![alt text](_static/rpi_imager.png)

1. **Installing Ubuntu server on your Raspberry Pi** is easy with the [Raspberry Pi Imager](https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/). Before starting ensure you have a uSD card attached to your PC/Laptop and that it has sufficient space (ideally larger than 16GB). Then:

   - Click on `CHOOSE OS` > `Raspberry Pi OS (other)` > `Raspberry Pi OS Lite (64-bit)`. Other versions of `Raspberry Pi OS` or even `Ubuntu Server` would likely work but try to use a `64-bit` one.
   - Select the uSD you want to flash the OS onto. (This will be the uSD you insert in your Raspberry Pi)
   - After selecting your storage, click on `Next`. Then, you'll be asked if you want to edit the settings of the image you are about to flash. This allows you to setup a custom username and password as well as indicate to which WiFi network your device should connect to. In the screenshot you can see some dummy values. This tutorial doesn't make any assumptions on these values, set them according to your needs.
   - Finally, complete the remaining steps to start flashing the chosen OS onto the uSD card.

2. **Preparations for your Flower experiments**

   - SSH into your Rapsberry Pi.
   - Follow the steps outlined in [Embedded Devices Setup](device_setup.md) to set it up for develpment. The objetive of this step is to have your Pi ready to join later as a Flower `SuperNode` to an existing federation.

3. Run your Flower experiments following the steps in the [Running FL with Flower](https://github.com/adap/flower/tree/main/examples/embedded-devices#running-fl-training-with-flower) section.

## Embedded Federated AI

> [!TIP]
> Follow this [how-to guide](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/how-to-run-flower-with-deployment-engine.html) to learn more about Flower's Deployment Engine, how setting up [secure TLS-enabled communications](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/how-to-enable-tls-connections.html) and [SuperNode authentication](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/how-to-authenticate-supernodes.html) works. If you are already familiar with how the Deployment Engine works, you may want to learn how to run this same example using Docker. Check out the [Flower with Docker](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/docker/index.html) documentation.

For this demo, we'll be using [Fashion-MNIST](https://huggingface.co/datasets/zalando-datasets/fashion_mnist), a popular dataset for image classification comprised of 10 classes (e.g. boot, dress, trouser) and a total of 70K `28x28` greyscale images. The training set contains 60K images.

> [!TIP]
> Refer to the [Flower Architecture](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/explanation-flower-architecture.html) page for an overview of the different components involved in a federation.

### Ensure your embedded devices have some data

Unless your devices already have some images that could be used to train a small CNN, we need to send a partition of the `Fashion-MNIST` dataset to each device that will run as a `SuperNode`. You can make use of the `generate_dataset.py` script to partition the `Fashion-MNIST` into N disjoint partitions that can be then given to each device in the federation.

```shell
# Partition the Fashion-MNIST dataset into two partitions
python generate_dataset.py --num-supernodes=2
```

The above command will create two subdirectories in `./datasets`, one for each partition. Next, copy those dataset over to your devices. You can use `scp` for this. Like shown below. Repeat for all your devices.

```shell
# Copy one partition to a device
scp -r datasets/fashionmnist_part_1 <user>@<device-ip>:/path/to/home
```

### Launching the Flower `SuperLink`

On your development machine, launch the `SuperLink`. You will connnect Flower `SuperNodes` to it in the next step.

```shell
flower-superlink --insecure
```

### Connecting Flower `SuperNodes`

With the `SuperLink` up and running, we can now launch a `SuperNode` on each embedded device. To do this, make sure you know the IP address of the machine running the `SuperLink` and that the necessary data has been copied to the device.

When using `--node-config`, note that we set a key named `dataset-path`. This key is required by the `ClientApp` defined in [client_app.py](embeddedexample/client_app.py). The configuration file will be automatically delivered to the `SuperNode`, ensuring it can execute the `ClientApp` logic correctly.

> [!NOTE]
> You don't need to clone this example to your embedded devices running as Flower `SuperNodes`. The code they will execute (in [embeddedexamples/client_app.py](embeddedexamples/client_app.py)) will automatically be delivered.

Ensure the Python environment you created earlier when setting up your device has all dependencies installed. For this example you'll need the following:

```shell
# After activating your environment
pip install -U flwr
pip install torch torchvision datasets
```

Now, launch your `SuperNode` pointing it to the dataset you `scp`-ed earlier:

```shell
# Repeat for each embedded device (adjust SuperLink IP and dataset-path)
flower-supernode --insecure --superlink="SUPERLINK_IP:9092" \
                 --node-config="dataset-path='path/to/fashionmnist_part_1'"
```

Repeat for each embedded device that you want to connect to the `SuperLink`.

### Run the Flower App

With both the long-running server (`SuperLink`) and two `SuperNodes` up and running, we can now start run. Let's first update the Flower Configuration file to add a new SuperLink connection.

Locate your Flower configuration file by running:

```shell
flwr config list
```

```console
# Example output:
Flower Config file: /path/to/your/.flwr/config.toml
SuperLink connections:
 supergrid
 local (default)
```

Open this configuration file and add a new SuperLink connection at the end:

```TOML
[superlink.embedded-federation]
address = "127.0.0.1:9093" # ControlAPI of your SUPERLINK
insecure = true
```

Finally, run your Flower App in your federation:

```shell
flwr run . embedded-federation
```

> [!TIP]
> For more details about how to create a SuperLink connection please refer to the [How-To use Flower's Deployment Engine guide](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/how-to-run-flower-with-deployment-engine.html). Read more about the Flower Configuration file in [this guide](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/ref-flower-configuration.html).
