framework/docs/source/how-to-manage-flower-federations.rst, before:

:og:description: Guide to manage Flower federations using the Deployment Engine.
.. meta::
    :description: Guide to manage Flower federations using the Deployment Engine.

.. |flower_cli_federation_link| replace:: ``Flower CLI``

.. _flower_cli_federation_link: ref-api-cli.html#flwr-federation

.. note::

    Flower Federation management is a new feature introduced in Flower 1.24.0. It gains
    new functionality in subsequent releases. Changes to the functionality described in
    this guide are also expected as the features provided via the ``flwr federation``
    commands mature.

###########################
 Manage Flower Federations
###########################

A Flower federation is comprised of a set of users and some or all the SuperNodes they
own that are registered with the same SuperLink. Members of a Flower federation can
execute runs (e.g. to federate the training of an AI model) across all SuperNodes that
are part of it.

In this how-to guide, you will:

- Learn how to see the federations you are part of.
- Learn how to display information about a specific federation.

******************
 List Federations
******************

With the |flower_cli_federation_link|_, you can easily inspect the federations your
Flower account is part of:

.. code-block:: shell

    $ flwr federation list

The above command will display a table with a row for each federation you are part of.
In this case there is only one federation named ``default``:

.. code-block:: shell

    📄 Listing federations...
    ┏━━━━━━━━━━━━┓
    ┃ Federation ┃
    ┡━━━━━━━━━━━━┩
    │ default    │
    └────────────┘

**********************
 Inspect a Federation
**********************

You can inspect a specific federation by using the ``flwr federation show`` command,
another command provided by the |flower_cli_federation_link|_. With this command, you
will be able to see the following information about a federation:

- The members of the federation.
- The SuperNodes registered with the federation and their status.
- The runs executed via the federation.

The ``flwr federation show`` command requires the name of the federation to inspect as
an argument. This can be specified as part of your ``pyproject.toml`` configuration. For
example:

.. code-block:: toml
    :emphasize-lines: 4
    :caption: pyproject.toml

    [tool.flwr.federations.local-deployment]
    address = "127.0.0.1:9093"
    insecure = true
    federation = "default"

In this example, the federation named ``default`` is specified. You can now inspect it
by running:

.. code-block:: shell

    $ flwr federation show . local-deployment

Then, assuming that there are two ``SuperNodes`` connected and that three runs have been
submitted through the federation, a representative output would be similar to:

.. code-block:: shell

    📄 Showing 'default' federation ...
    Federation Members
    ┏━━━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━┓
    ┃ Account ID ┃  Role  ┃
    ┡━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━┩
    │ <id:none>  │ Member │
    └────────────┴────────┘
            SuperNodes in the Federation
    ┏━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━┓
    ┃       Node ID        ┃    Owner    ┃ Status ┃
    ┡━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━┩
    │ 1277309880252492806  │ <name:none> │ online │
    ├──────────────────────┼─────────────┼────────┤
    │ 13280365719060659445 │ <name:none> │ online │
    └──────────────────────┴─────────────┴────────┘
                                Runs in the Federation
    ┏━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━┓
    ┃       Run ID        ┃             App            ┃       Status       ┃ Elapsed  ┃
    ┡━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━┩
    │ 6665860355925098787 │ @flwrlabs/vision==1.0.0    │ finished:completed │ 00:00:24 │
    ├─────────────────────┼────────────────────────────┼────────────────────┼──────────┤
    │ 6896250833792831197 │ @flwrlabs/analytics==2.0.0 │ finished:stopped   │ 00:00:08 │
    ├─────────────────────┼────────────────────────────┼────────────────────┼──────────┤
    │ 3918106370412458251 │ @flwrlabs/llm==1.5.0       │ running            │ 00:00:02 │
    └─────────────────────┴────────────────────────────┴────────────────────┴──────────┘

Note how the ``SuperNodes`` table shows a subset of the information available via the
command ``flwr supernode list`` (Learn more about this command in the
:doc:`how-to-authenticate-supernodes` guide). Similarly, the ``Runs`` table shows a
subset of the information available via the ``flwr list`` command.

Commit message:

refactor(framework): Unify `flwr federation show` and `flwr federation list` (#6340)
Co-authored-by: Heng Pan <pan@flower.ai>

framework/docs/source/how-to-manage-flower-federations.rst, after:

:og:description: Guide to manage Flower federations using the Deployment Engine.
.. meta::
    :description: Guide to manage Flower federations using the Deployment Engine.

.. |flower_cli_federation_link| replace:: ``Flower CLI``

.. _flower_cli_federation_link: ref-api-cli.html#flwr-federation

.. note::

    Flower Federation management is a new feature introduced in Flower 1.24.0. It gains
    new functionality in subsequent releases. Changes to the functionality described in
    this guide are also expected as the features provided via the ``flwr federation``
    commands mature.

###########################
 Manage Flower Federations
###########################

A Flower federation is comprised of a set of users and some or all the SuperNodes they
own that are registered with the same SuperLink. Members of a Flower federation can
execute runs (e.g. to federate the training of an AI model) across all SuperNodes that
are part of it.

In this how-to guide, you will:

- Learn how to see the federations you are part of.
- Learn how to display information about a specific federation.

******************
 List Federations
******************

With the |flower_cli_federation_link|_, you can easily inspect the federations your
Flower account is part of:

.. code-block:: shell

    $ flwr federation list

The above command will display a table with a row for each federation you are part of.
In this case there is only one federation named ``default``:

.. code-block:: shell

    📄 Listing federations...
    ┏━━━━━━━━━━━━┓
    ┃ Federation ┃
    ┡━━━━━━━━━━━━┩
    │ default    │
    └────────────┘

**********************
 Inspect a Federation
**********************

You can inspect a specific federation by providing the name of the federation to the
``flwr federation list`` command. With this command, you will be able to see the
following information about a federation:

- The members of the federation.
- The SuperNodes registered with the federation and their status.
- The runs executed via the federation.

The ``flwr federation list`` command requires the name of the federation to inspect as
an argument. This can be specified as part of your ``pyproject.toml`` configuration. For
example:

.. code-block:: toml
    :emphasize-lines: 4
    :caption: pyproject.toml

    [tool.flwr.federations.local-deployment]
    address = "127.0.0.1:9093"
    insecure = true
    federation = "default"

In this example, the federation named ``default`` is specified. You can now inspect it
by running:

.. code-block:: shell

    $ flwr federation list . local-deployment --federation default

Then, assuming that there are two ``SuperNodes`` connected and that three runs have been
submitted through the federation, a representative output would be similar to:

.. code-block:: shell

    📄 Showing 'default' federation ...
    Federation Members
    ┏━━━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━┓
    ┃ Account ID ┃  Role  ┃
    ┡━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━┩
    │ <id:none>  │ Member │
    └────────────┴────────┘
            SuperNodes in the Federation
    ┏━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━┓
    ┃       Node ID        ┃    Owner    ┃ Status ┃
    ┡━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━┩
    │ 1277309880252492806  │ <name:none> │ online │
    ├──────────────────────┼─────────────┼────────┤
    │ 13280365719060659445 │ <name:none> │ online │
    └──────────────────────┴─────────────┴────────┘
                                Runs in the Federation
    ┏━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━┓
    ┃       Run ID        ┃             App            ┃       Status       ┃ Elapsed  ┃
    ┡━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━┩
    │ 6665860355925098787 │ @flwrlabs/vision==1.0.0    │ finished:completed │ 00:00:24 │
    ├─────────────────────┼────────────────────────────┼────────────────────┼──────────┤
    │ 6896250833792831197 │ @flwrlabs/analytics==2.0.0 │ finished:stopped   │ 00:00:08 │
    ├─────────────────────┼────────────────────────────┼────────────────────┼──────────┤
    │ 3918106370412458251 │ @flwrlabs/llm==1.5.0       │ running            │ 00:00:02 │
    └─────────────────────┴────────────────────────────┴────────────────────┴──────────┘

Note how the ``SuperNodes`` table shows a subset of the information available via the
command ``flwr supernode list`` (Learn more about this command in the
:doc:`how-to-authenticate-supernodes` guide). Similarly, the ``Runs`` table shows a
subset of the information available via the ``flwr list`` command.
