datasets/doc/source/index.rst, before:

Flower Datasets
===============

Flower Datasets (``flwr-datasets``) is a library to quickly and easily create datasets for federated
learning/analytics/evaluation. It is created by the ``Flower Labs`` team that also created `Flower <https://flower.ai>`_ - a Friendly Federated Learning Framework.

Flower Datasets Framework
-------------------------

Tutorials
~~~~~~~~~

A learning-oriented series of tutorials is the best place to start.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Tutorial

   tutorial-quickstart

How-to guides
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Problem-oriented how-to guides show step-by-step how to achieve a specific goal.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: How-to guides

   how-to-install-flwr-datasets
   how-to-use-with-pytorch
   how-to-use-with-tensorflow
   how-to-use-with-numpy
   how-to-use-with-local-data
   how-to-disable-enable-progress-bar

References
~~~~~~~~~~

Information-oriented API reference and other reference material.

.. autosummary::
   :toctree: ref-api
   :template: autosummary/module.rst
   :caption: API reference
   :recursive:

      flwr_datasets



Main features
-------------
Flower Datasets library supports:

- **downloading datasets** - choose the dataset from Hugging Face's ``dataset``
- **partitioning datasets** - customize the partitioning scheme
- **creating centralized datasets** - leave parts of the dataset unpartitioned (e.g. for centralized evaluation)

Thanks to using Hugging Face's ``datasets`` used under the hood, Flower Datasets integrates with the following popular formats/frameworks:

- Hugging Face
- PyTorch
- TensorFlow
- Numpy
- Pandas
- Jax
- Arrow

Install
-------

The simplest install is

.. code-block:: bash

  python -m pip install flwr-datasets

If you plan to use the image datasets

.. code-block:: bash

  python -m pip install flwr-datasets[vision]

If you plan to use the audio datasets

.. code-block:: bash

  python -m pip install flwr-datasets[audio]

Check out the full details on the download in :doc:`how-to-install-flwr-datasets`.

How To Use the library
----------------------
Learn how to use the ``flwr-datasets`` library from the :doc:`tutorial-quickstart` examples .

Join the Flower Community
-------------------------

The Flower Community is growing quickly - we're a friendly group of researchers, engineers, students, professionals, academics, and other enthusiasts.

.. button-link:: https://flower.ai/join-slack
    :color: primary
    :shadow:

    Join us on Slack

Commit message:

Add visualization info to the docs + created plot

datasets/doc/source/index.rst, after:

Flower Datasets
===============

Flower Datasets (``flwr-datasets``) is a library to quickly and easily create datasets for federated
learning/analytics/evaluation. It is created by the ``Flower Labs`` team that also created `Flower <https://flower.ai>`_ - a Friendly Federated Learning Framework.

Flower Datasets Framework
-------------------------

Tutorials
~~~~~~~~~

A learning-oriented series of tutorials is the best place to start.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Tutorial

   tutorial-quickstart

How-to guides
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Problem-oriented how-to guides show step-by-step how to achieve a specific goal.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: How-to guides

   how-to-install-flwr-datasets
   how-to-use-with-pytorch
   how-to-use-with-tensorflow
   how-to-use-with-numpy
   how-to-use-with-local-data
   how-to-disable-enable-progress-bar

References
~~~~~~~~~~

Information-oriented API reference and other reference material.

.. autosummary::
   :toctree: ref-api
   :template: autosummary/module.rst
   :caption: API reference
   :recursive:

      flwr_datasets



Main features
-------------
Flower Datasets library supports:

- **downloading datasets** - choose the dataset from Hugging Face's ``dataset`` (`link <https://huggingface.co/datasets>`_)
- **partitioning datasets** - choose one of the implemnted partitioning scheme or create a fully custom one
- **creating centralized datasets** - leave parts of the dataset unpartitioned (e.g. for centralized evaluation)
- **visualization of the partitioned datasets** - visualize the label distribution of the partitioned dataset (and compare the results on different parameters of the same partitioning schemes, different datasets, different partitioning schemes, or any mix of them)


.. image:: ./_static/readme/comparison_of_partitioning_schemes.png
  :align: center
  :alt: Comparison of Partitioning Schemes on CIFAR10


Thanks to using Hugging Face's ``datasets`` used under the hood, Flower Datasets integrates with the following popular formats/frameworks:

- Hugging Face
- PyTorch
- TensorFlow
- Numpy
- Pandas
- Jax
- Arrow

Install
-------

The simplest install is

.. code-block:: bash

  python -m pip install flwr-datasets

If you plan to use the image datasets

.. code-block:: bash

  python -m pip install flwr-datasets[vision]

If you plan to use the audio datasets

.. code-block:: bash

  python -m pip install flwr-datasets[audio]

Check out the full details on the download in :doc:`how-to-install-flwr-datasets`.

How To Use the library
----------------------
Learn how to use the ``flwr-datasets`` library from the :doc:`tutorial-quickstart` examples .

Join the Flower Community
-------------------------

The Flower Community is growing quickly - we're a friendly group of researchers, engineers, students, professionals, academics, and other enthusiasts.

.. button-link:: https://flower.ai/join-slack
    :color: primary
    :shadow:

    Join us on Slack
